# Comparing_Encryption_Algorithms_For_Data_Security
In this project, different encryption algorithms, namely Advanced Encryption Standard Algorithm (AES), Data Encryption Standard Algorithm (DES), Triple Data Encryption Standard Algorithm (3DES) and Blowfish Algorithm, are simulated in Python. A comparative analysis is done on these algorithms.

OBJECTIVE:

Encryption of data is one of the most crucial concepts to focus on in the field of cybersecurity as every organization as well as individual is dependent on it for confidentiality of their data. Generally, ordinary text or file is scrambled using a particular key which is communicated and when received, it is unscrambled using the same or different key by the receiver. 
	In this project, different encryption algorithms, namely Advanced Encryption Standard Algorithm (AES), Data Encryption Standard Algorithm (DES), Triple Data Encryption Standard Algorithm (3DES) and Blowfish Algorithm, are simulated in Python. A comparative analysis is done on these algorithms where the computation time, encryption as well as decryption, was calculated and visualised. The final results showed that the AES algorithm took the least time to get executed and 3DES took the most time to be computed.

INTRODUCTION

When data is being communicated, the most important aspect that a user requires is privacy of their data. Confidentiality of data is constantly being studied upon where data can be encoded and only authorized persons can access the data. The act of doing this is popularly known as encryption. The applications of cryptography can be endless and has been prevalent since the medieval times. Encryption can be defined as the means of securing digital data by using one or more mathematical techniques, known as algorithms, along with a password or key used to decrypt the information. It is done for purposes of security to avoid snoopers, hackers or fraudulent persons to access the data such as passwords, financial details, personal data or any other secret information. This protects all the personal data of a user while they are in communication. It also provides authentication as only authenticated users will have the key to decipher the encrypted data. Using parity in few algorithms, the integrity of the message is also maintained as the user can check for error detection.
	Despite the numerous cryptographic algorithms being implemented in our world today, we still face multiple issues by their usage. While some can prove to be quite efficient in communication across networks, others are better in file encryption such as images, text files etc. It is thus important to make the correct decision on choosing the proper algorithm depending on the work of the user. Encryption algorithms consume a significant amount of computing resources such as CPU time, memory, and battery power. Battery power is subjected to the problem of energy consumption due to encryption algorithms. This project aims to analyse a few of the algorithms and compare their execution time visually. 
	Encryption algorithms can be classified into two major categories: 
(i) Symmetric Encryption Algorithm: In this type of encryption algorithm, one single key is used by both the sender and the receiver. The sender encrypts their message using a private key. They share this key only to the receiver of the message along with the actual message. No one else will be able to understand the message without the private key of the sender to decipher the message. Once the receiver gets the required message, they can use the private key sent by the sender to decrypt the encrypted message and hence confidentiality is maintained. The keys may be identical, or there may be a simple transformation to go between the two keys. The keys, in practice, represent a shared secret between two or more parties that can be used to maintain a private information link.
Symmetric Encryption Algorithms can also be further divided into two subcategories:
a.	Block Cipher Algorithms: A specific secret key encrypts a fixed number of data bits into blocks of electronic data. As the data is being encrypted, the system holds the data in its memory as it waits for complete blocks.
b.	Stream Cipher Algorithms: Data is encrypted as it is being streamed instead of being retained in the system’s memory.
A few examples of symmetric encryption are:
a.	Data Encryption Standard (DES): In modern technology, DES was the first encryption standard to cipher electronic communications. It was developed in the early 1970s at IBM and based on an earlier design by Horst Fiestel, the algorithm was submitted to the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) after the agency had invited them to propose a candidate for the protection of sensitive, unclassified electronic government data. DES encryption works by taking a plaintext input and breaking it into smaller chunks (64-bit blocks) to encrypt it using a cryptographic key. DES has both a 64-bit block and key size, but in practice, the key only grants 56-bits of security. The NIST had to replace the DES algorithm because its 56-bit key lengths were too small, considering the increased processing power of newer computers. Brute force attacks were constant and could easily decipher DES encrypted texts.

b.	Triple Data Encryption Standard (3DES): The 3DES encryption algorithm was derived from the original DES algorithm. 3DES was developed as a more secure alternative because of DES’s small key length. In 3DES, the DES algorithm is run through three times with three keys; however, it is only considered secure if three separate keys are used. Although 3DES is still being widely used in the sectors of online payments, NIST has decided to discontinue the 3DES encryption as it is still proven to be very vulnerable.
c.	Advanced Encryption Standard (AES): This is one of the commonly used and most popular Block Cipher Symmetric Encryptions. It was originally known as Rijndael. It was developed by National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 1997 and by 2001, it was declared as the standard set for the encryption of electronic data after DES was found to be very vulnerable. Rijndael is a family of ciphers with different key and block sizes. For AES, NIST selected three members of the Rijndael family, each with a block size of 128 bits, but three different key lengths: 128, 192 and 256 bits.AES has been adopted by the US Government for standard encryption. For this project, AES with a 256 bit key has been used.

d.	Blowfish: Blowfish is the encryption algorithm that was created by Bruce Schneier in 1993. It was originally developed as an alternative to the DES encryption algorithm. It is significantly faster than DES and provides a good encryption rate with no effective cryptanalysis technique found to date. It takes a variable length key, ranging from 32 bits to 448 bits. This project takes a key of 448 bits.

(ii) Asymmetric Algorithms: Asymmetric cryptography is a branch of cryptography where a secret key can be divided into a key pair consisting of a public key and a private key. A receiver has two keys, a private key, which is known only to the user, and its derived public key, which is known to all. When a sender wants to send a message to that receiver, they encrypt the message using the public key of the receiver, which cannot be deciphered using that same key. After the message is sent, the receiver uses their private key to decrypt that same message. The reason why asymmetric encryption had to be invented was to solve the key distribution problem that arises in the case of the symmetric encryption method. Few examples of asymmetric key encryption are Rivest Shamir Adleman (RSA), Digital Signature Standard (DSS), Elliptical Curve Cryptography (ECC) and Diffie-Hellman exchange method.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
	The following project deals with conducting a detailed comparative analysis of the symmetric encryption algorithms. The algorithms analysed in this project are Data Encryption Standard (DES), Triple Data Encryption Standard (3DES), Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) and Blowfish. A data block of different sizes was encrypted by each of these algorithms and the time was noted down for comparison. The working of each algorithm is given are the following:
a.	Data encryption standard (DES): DES is a block cipher and encrypts data in blocks of size of 64 bits each, which means 64 bits of plain text goes as the input to DES, which produces 64 bits of ciphertext. The same algorithm and key are used for encryption and decryption, with minor differences. The key length is 56 bits or 8 bytes.
b.	Triple Data Encryption Standard (3DES): 3DES works almost the same as DES, except it ciphers the text thrice. Three keys are generated, names K1, K2 and K3. The data is enciphered with the DES algorithm using K1, which is further encrypted using K2 and again encrypted using K3. The decryption process follows similar steps. Each key would be 8 bytes, making the total of the three keys to 24 bytes.
c.	Advanced Encryption Standard (AES): AES is a block cipher. The key size generated here is 256 bits or 32 bytes. Every data block of size 128 bits is encrypted. It takes 128 bits as input and outputs 128 bits of encrypted cipher text as output. A 256 bit key would take 14 rounds to be encrypted and decrypted. Each round comprises 4 steps : SubBytes, ShiftRows, MixColumns and Add Round Key. After all these rounds 128 bits of encrypted data is given back as output. This process is repeated until all the data to be encrypted undergoes this process. The stages of each round in decryption is as follows: Add round key, Inverse MixColumns, ShiftRows and Inverse SubByte. After all these rounds 128 bits of decrypted data is given back as output. This process is repeated until all the data to be decrypted undergoes this process, same as encryption.
d.	Blowfish Algorithm: Blowfish is a very fast algorithm which takes 64 bit input as plaintext and generates 64 bit output ciphertext. It uses the concept of P-array which uses 32 bit subkeys and there are 18 P-arrays, P1 to P18. Blowfish Algorithm runs 16 rounds. The key size used here is 448 bits.

CHALLENGES FACED:
	Finding the efficiency of each encryption algorithm based on their execution time was not possible. The times differed from system to system, depending on their processing power, battery power and consumption, memory and also on how well the system was connected to the internet. Further analysis would have to be done to actually get which algorithm is the most efficient to encrypt what kind of data.

APPLICATIONS:
	Finding the time for execution for each algorithm provides a user the necessary algorithm for their particular use. If a user wants to use any of the encryption algorithms which encrypts at a faster rate, they would use the algorithm which showed the least execution time and with further analysis, there can be results on the efficiency of each algorithm and their susceptibility to attacks too.

CONCLUSION:
	For every size of data that was analysed, it was found that the AES encryption algorithm was the fastest among all the common encryption algorithms used. 3DES was the slowest encryption algorithm among all and took nearly thrice the time taken to encrypt and decrypt data than DES. Blowfish came close to AES in being a fast encryption algorithm with DES being third. The key sizes used here for AES is 32 bytes, for DES is 8 bytes, for 3DES is 24 bytes and for Blowfish is 56 bytes.
